Initial feature gate documentation (#992)
cert-manager/website: content/docs/installation/features.md

---
title: Features
description: cert-manager feature policy

> ---

Reviewer: nitpick: I don't feel like I've got a great suggestion here, but it feels like "features" doesn't quite match what this page describes.  Don't get me wrong - i love the idea of adding this page.

Maybe something like "Unstable Features", "Feature Flags" or something? I think as a user if I see "features" in the sidebar I might expect like a vendor pitch of what the product can do, and I'd skip it. If I saw something like "feature flags" I'd think "oh, more things to try!" and check it out.

What do you think?

Reviewer 2: `experimental`, `evolving`, `under development`

New cert-manager features and functionality is often initially implemented behind a feature gate. This is so as to not break users with functionality that has not yet been tested in production as well as to give us a chance to remove or modify API fields and functionality following user feedback.

> We have alpha and beta features. We do not aim to keep any of the features in alpha or beta stage indefinitely. Feature gating should only be used for functionality that can eventually be turned on by default for all users (GA).

Reviewer: question: I think the way in which some features currently behind gates are implemented might break this?

e.g. ValidateCAA is feature gated, but it's [also](https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager/blob/b0caedffd915eab1a52e06473dc2b5b527b84460/pkg/controller/acmechallenges/sync.go#L149) a toggle on whether or not to do the validation. We might want to graduate ValidateCAA to GA (or not, it's just an example) but it would seem reasonable for users to want to disable it.

In fact, for this specific feature I'd imagine users would want to opt-in rather than opt-out (and that might even be required so that we don't break people).

Considering this:

> Feature gating should only be used for functionality that can eventually be turned on by default for all users (GA).

For this to be true, we'd have to add a new flag "--validate-caa" which is required _as well as the feature gate_, right? (Or some other way of toggling the feature on in addition to the feature gate)

Author: > For this to be true, we'd have to add a new flag "--validate-caa" which is required as well as the feature gate, right? (Or some other way of toggling the feature on in addition to the feature gate)

Yes, I think that the mechanism for marking a piece of functionality as alpha/beta should be separate from ways how something that should always be opt-in gets toggled on/off. I think that's better than mixing the two up because it simplifies the feature flag mechanism that is already complicated, is how it's implemented in kube and would appear more consistent to users once it's in GA.

It has the downside that when some functionality X that should always be opt-in is in alpha, using it might look like
```
go run <cert-manager-controller> \
 --features-gates=<optional-functionality-x>=true \
 --<enable-optional-functionality-x>
```
but I think this inconvenience is acceptable so that in GA we can have

```
go run <cert-manager-controller> 
 --<enable-optional-functionality-a>
 --<enable-optional-functionality-b>
 --<enable-optional-functionality-x>
```
and not
```
go run <cert-manager-controller> 
 --<enable-optional-functionality-a>
 --<enable-optional-functionality-b>
 --feature-gates=<enable-optional-functionality-x> // X is GA same as A and B, but gets toggled on via --feature-gates flag because it once was an alpha feature
```

I think it's ok if enabling an alpha feature is a bit clunky, perhaps it'd even encourage folks to nudge us to move it through to graduation.

Let me know what you think.

Author: > But since the features are feature gated

😆 

yeah, I think in some cases it might not be possible to know whether something will need to opt-in. For example with Gateway, we originally assumed that those CRDs will at some point become part of core Kubernetes.

A feature gate can be toggled on/off using `--feature-gates` flags on cert-manager controller. For feature gated functionality that comes with new API fields there is also a corresponding feature gate on webhook that also needs to be enabled using a `--feature-gates` flag if you want to use it.

**Alpha**

All alpha features are off by default.

> We keep the right to remove or change alpha features without a warning.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We retain the right to change or remove alpha features without warning.
```

> An API field that is part of an alpha feature and requires a webhook feature flag to be used also can be removed from the API without a warning.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An API field that is part of an alpha feature and requires a webhook feature flag to be used can also be removed from the API without warning.
```

> An alpha feature might not work for all versions of Kubernetes supported by cert-manager.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An alpha feature might not work for all of cert-manager's supported Kubernetes versions.
```

**Beta**

All beta features are off by default.

> Beta features will not be removed, but can be changed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Beta features will not be removed, but may be changed.
```

If the feature gets changed in incompatible ways, we will provide migration instructions.

> A beta feature will work with all versions of Kubernetes supported by cert-manager.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A beta feature will work with all versions of cert-manager's supported Kubernetes versions.
```

**GA**

A feature that is GA is on by default and cannot be disabled.

> With regards to API fields and their functionality, we keep Kubernetes API compatibility promise https://cert-manager.io/docs/installation/api-compatibility/.

Reviewer 2: Why is this a bare url?

> The feature flag for a GA feature will eventually be removed.

Reviewer: suggestion: I'm not sure if there'd be any reason to ever _actually_ remove one - it feels like a needless way to break people.

It doesn't seem like a huge burden to move old feature flags to `OldFeatureFlags []string`, where if any of them are passed we just log a warning and then move on.

Removing would make sense if we were ever gonna re-use a flag name but I think that could get confusing tbh

Author: Yeah I agree with you, I think removing would make sense if we ended up with a huge number of features gates, so that the help output would become unreadable, but this is currently not the case.

Author: The downside would be that if it's a feature gated opt-in functionality that gets enabled via flag in GA, it could be confusing that it appears in two places. But since this would be non-functional, we could change it if folks complained.

> 

Author: This is largely adapted from https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#feature-stages

## Graduation

The graduation criteria can be different for each feature.

> Generally, we find user feedback most valuable when determining if a feature is sufficiently mature to graduate. If you are using an alpha or beta feature and would like to see it graduate, it would be great if you could give us some feedback about how you use it and whether you find the API useful to initiate graduation process. Feel free to [open a GitHub issue](https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager/issues/new/choose) or [join one of our meetings](https://cert-manager.io/docs/contributing/#meetings) to talk about this.

Reviewer: nitpick: the meetings link is to the website, so it might be worth following the [linking to other pages](https://github.com/cert-manager/website/#task-linking-to-other-documentation-pages) guide.

Author: Thank for the reminder, that guide is great btw 👍🏼 I have changed all internal links.

> ## List of current feature gates

Author: Inspiration from https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#feature-gates

### Alpha

See `--feature-gates` flags on cert-manager controller and webhook to enable any of these features.

> - `AdditionalCertificateOutputFormats`. Added in cert-manager 1.7.0. Allows to specify additional formats in which cert-manager will store issued certificates and keys. See [release note](https://cert-manager.io/docs/release-notes/release-notes-1.7#additional-certificate-output-formats). Requires the feature to be enabled on both cert-manager controller and webhook

Reviewer: nitpick: another website link here; there are a few more in this section.
